#what, me complain?
*2014/06/29* - hack reactor

I recently replied to a Quora post, ["What are the biggest complaints from students in Hack Reactor?"](http://www.quora.com/Hack-Reactor/What-are-the-biggest-complaints-from-students-in-Hack-Reactor). To check out Marcus Phillip's (as always) eloquent and thorough persepective, and other takes as well, click on the link above. In the meantime, here's my response: Enjoy!

I just finished my 4th week at Hack Reactor and am excited to chime in on this discussion. It’s Sunday morning and in spite of my intention to sleep in, I seem to have started waking up early  as uncontrollably as I’m having trouble going to sleep. I’m so happy I get more time today to hack. Thanks for starting this conversation. Hack Reactor is brutal: safely and intelligently, and intentionally brutal, but if you’re considering attending you would do well to know about where your idealism is going to throw a temper tantrum. Full disclosure: I’m in love with this place. I’ll try to voice the part of me that complains because it hates leaving what it believes to be the safety of certitude.

I’m catching my second wind this week. So many of the strategies I’m used to employing to do something effectively have, with fatigue, become unsustainable, either because I don’t have the energy to virtualize what I’m about to do before I do it, or, because the curriculum is more challenging than the situations where I’ve used these strategies in the past. Now I’m starting to experience a quiet inner process where I don’t spend too much time expecting that I know what I’m doing and instead, proceed, and watch as I pull effectiveness spontaneously out of thin-air (a skill that is developing from all the work I've been doing). This transforming serves as the grounds for a very deep and primal complaint:

"What do you mean I don’t get to keep doing what I’m already the best at?!?!?!”

Everyone knows we only needed, all the generations of being human, to make it to 20 or so to have kids in order to keep the (species) train on track. It has proven evolutionarily effective to figure out what works nice and early and prioritize acting in such a way, over, and in spite of, a competing human urge, that is also seeming to prove effective, to play and experience novelty. We have more like 3 brains and they’re pair programming, and you tell me who’s driving and who’s navigating.

We get a lecture during the first week and one of the first slides reads “Bigger, Faster, Stronger…..than you.” If you come to Hack Reactor you will be exhausted (which is not the magical feeling you are imagining it is if you’re not exhausted right now), and you will be too exhausted to pretend you’re the smartest person amongst all your friends (which even if you’re a small exception to thinking this, I bet you wouldn’t even consider Hack Reactor if you didn’t have some latent dialoguing to yourself about this being true.) So there’s a complaint: even though the environment and staff is incredibly supportive at Hack Reactor, I’ve had to face the fact that I’m actually not the smartest person in my generation (or even close) and no one has been able to realize that for me, and it’s liberating and it sucks.

That brings me to pair programming. Pair programming is incredible, and incredibly challenging. I spent 3 months going from 0 code experience to passing the Hack Reactor technical interview, and all that time I didn’t do a lick of collaborating, except to (gladly) steal from all the kind people who have taken it upon themselves to teach by way of posting material on the internet. You have to give up control when you pair program. You might think you know what this means, but I bet you don’t. Depending, you might just act out or plow your way though it by doing what you’re used to doing, but hopefully you’ll find yourself in the deeply transformative (aka tumultuous and therefore self-complaining) position of attempting to reframe how you go about pursuing intellectual/creative projects with others. You might even undergo the task (as recommended to us by the staff) of taking responsibility for your own experience. This will mean it is never your partner’s fault. Again, the part of me that has already found a safe way of doing things, continues to throw a fit as I face the reality of using a computer that is not fully under my governance, with another human who as it turns out, is just as sophisticated, wily, creative, and unpredictable as me.

Unfortunately, the coffee at Hack Reactor sucks. I’ll admit I’m kind of a snob, but if you drink the coffee there it will not contribute towards your doing well in the curriculum. They do provide hot water however, and Sight Glass is just a few blocks away. (And of course they don’t owe us good coffee, I’m just complaining is all.)

Lastly, and this one is actually very disconcerting to me, is how highly under represented women are in our cohorts. There are not zero women, but close to zero women. Now, let me be clear, this is not Hack Reactor’s fault in my opinion. In fact, I see Hack Reactor, by way of their Mission Bits intern program, at least equally representing women at an age, and stage of the game where it really matters (and I hope that they will continue). That said, coding is rad, and this school is mind-blowingly incredible (which I’ll have to write about under a different post) and I’m probably about to go out in a few months and make a bunch of money building really cool stuff that might make the world a much better place, and it just sucks to me that the demographic of others doing the same is so disproportionately skewed. Who do I complain to about this?

Okay enough complaining, I should be coding.

Oh yeah, one more thing, if you come you will not have another life for 3 months. If you say to yourself under the breath that you’re still going to hang out or do anything but Hack Reactor, then you’re going to be complaining about that. Talk to everyone about this before you come. I only did this 75% of the way, in spite of our instructor’s urgings, and now I have loved ones complaining to me.

Good Day!
